Placeholder for new materials (We wi
//-------------Add new materials below this line …. Do not add anything above this line ------

Going through the corpus of thoughts posted on this page, it seems prudent at this stage to structure the paper in the form of a series of questions that are then answered by the authors in this paper using best evidence. These questions and issues would pertain to key practice, normative, and research ethics.

Table
How is ethics different from law?
Telehealth and legal issues
(last part of Chapter 13: what is the ethical implication of withholding care through telehealth in response to jurisdictional restrictions: Dr. Gogia will expand on this)
Reach out to Craig, Richard Scott, Anthony, and Maurice Mars
Is home based care prolonging life unnecessarily? -  Quality of life vs Quantity of life
Is ethical concerns and values the same everywhere? (cultural and religious differences)
Is there a need for training on ethics for telemedicine and telehealth?
Has ethics any role to play in Universal Health Coverage?
Does big data generated by telemedicine services have any ethical implications? Like what?
Is there a link between ethics in telemedicine and other ethical practices linked to new medical technologies (personalized medicine, precision medicine, robots)?



// Who’s going to write what
// This is a VERY rough outline, stream of consciousness writing



Scope of telemedicine:
Telemedicine as it is
Synchronic interaction
Video conferencing
Phone calls
Asynchronous
Store and forward
Remote gathering of physio data
Monitoring 
Real-time
Near real-time
Mobile health
Internet of things (IoT)
Wearables and their associated data
Remote data mining and data analytics??
Ethics?
 Definition of Ethics: Moral principles that govern a person’s behavior or the conducting of an activity.

Medical ethics: application of the core principles of bioethics (Autonomy, Beneficence, Confidentiality, non-maleficence , justice) to medical and healthcare decisions

Patient at one end
MD at the other
MD at one end, Specialist at the other
What does Ethics mean in this context
Patient - app 
Patient - app - provider
Remote meeting - how does Ethics come into play
How does normative ethics differ in this context from a face to face meeting
Normative: 
Autonomy
Beneficence
Confidentiality


-  First do no harm
- Telemedicine and mobile health
- Mobile health
 - Smartphone can induce medical knowledge
- Which does not necessarily does not have simultaneous input of a provider
- - Ethics: content provided should be objective and not serve any commercial purpose of the content creator. Aimed towards improving the patient’s health. 
- Ethics of mobile health: medical information, know when to refer the patient to face to face care or to go to the emergency room 
- ?? Artificial intelligence, smart devices, Machine learning, shopping trolley problem

- Case study:
( - Physiological sensors
- Each one of these write data in their own format
- Proprietary format not shared with anyone else  (Except continua and consortium for consumer devices)https://www.pchalliance.org/about-continua
- Apple Health Health link,
- Apple: ‘why don’t you write to our standards? Write software without having to understand proprietary data format (Apple published the standard)
- None of the others wrote to that standard
- This is unethical that it prevented developers to write software or use AI to utilise the data 
- Keep this in perspective )
- Ethics versus business strategy 
- When does business strategy (profit motive), what are the ethical practices while still creating profitable business
- Creative commons?? Freedom  issues such as FOSS and open sourcing 
- Shall we see transparency in data gathered by IoT devices as Ethical issues?
- Transparency and widespread availability and sharing of data and their relationship with Ethics or ethical practices
- Is it ethical practice to make data available to everyone
- Shall hiding data ethical?
- PHI (patient health information: which elements or how much shall we collect and disseminate and make it publicly available, what are the ethical implications of such practices?)
- HIPAA and issues and their relationship with Ethics
- Empirical studies and/or the need for empirical studies (Vignesh)


Is it ethically appropriate for doctors to communicate with their terminally ill patients via telemedicine? “I just don’t think that critically ill patients should see a screen, it should be a human being with compassion.” (Jacobs, 2019)
While new technologies and new models of care continue to emerge, physicians’ fundamental ethical responsibilities do not change. The task is to understand how these fundamental responsibilities may play out differently in the context of telehealth and telemedicine than they do in in-person patient-physician interactions. Although physicians’ fundamental ethical responsibilities do not change, the continuum of possible patient-physician interactions in telehealth/telemedicine give rise to differing levels of accountability for physicians. (Chaet, 2017)
Many of the ethical challenges with telemedicine surround the lack of face-to-face contact that traditionally takes place in healthcare. With an unknown patient, physicians have to envision they are working with the ideal. (Medical Economics, 2015)
Ethical medical practice must remain focused on the patient as a whole person who is more than a data set or collection of digital images (Cheshire, 2017)

Physicians must ensure that they have the information they need to make well-grounded clinical recommendations when they cannot personally conduct a physical examination, such as by having another health care professional at the patient’s site conduct the exam or obtaining vital information through remote technologies. (AMA)

We should think about the same ethical issues with telemedicine that we have always considered in caring for our patients. If we focus on maintaining a strong patient-doctor relationship, protecting patient privacy, promoting equity in access and treatment, and seeking the best possible outcomes, telemedicine can enhance medical practice and patient care in ways that we can all feel comfortable with. (Mehta, 2014)

It would be pleasure contributing to this work. I will be happy to write something on the following, as I included in the document:
Is ethical concerns and values the same everywhere? (cultural and religious differences)
Is there a need for training on ethics for telemedicine and telehealth?
Has ethics any role to play in Universal Health Coverage?
Does big data generated by telemedicine services have any ethical implications? Like what?
Is there a link between ethics in telemedicine and other ethical practices linked to new medical technologies (personalized medicine, precision medicine, robots)?


Much of the modern healthcare paradigm is about establishing interactions across patients, providers, and settings (kuziemsky et al., 2018). Telehealth is a key facilitator of these interactions (Kuziemsky et al., 2017). However, telehealth mediated interactions can result in unintended consequences such as ethical issues due to the nature of how interactions emerge. One example of an ethical issue from telehealth interactions is the development of patient-provider relationships. Telehealth applications that enable eCoaching of patients are advocated as a means of promoting healthy behaviors for patient groups such as for monitoring and management of chronic illness (DeJesus et al., 2018). However, while patient-provider telehealth monitoring often achieves positive outcomes,  it can create undesired outcomes if patients  are passively steered towards outcomes by the app rather than acting in a participatory manner (Adams and Niezen, 2014). A second example is the formation of patient-provider communication channels. In March 2019 a patient was told he was dying by a physician using a telehealth application (https://www.cnn.com/2019/03/10/health/patient-dies-robot-doctor/index.html). The response from the patient’s family and the general public was of overwhelming outrage with the physician and hospital being accused of delivering grim news with a lack of dignity. While the hospital acknowledged shortcomings in how care was provided, the example does raise a significant ethical issue in that we cannot always predict the outcomes from telehealth mediated interactions.  A third example of ethical issues from telehealth mediated interactions are the more indirect outcomes such as patient data being collected or shared inappropriately by either the patient, the provider or other patients they may be interacting with via telehealth applications (Kuziemsky et al., 2018; Denecke et al., 2017). These issues can be particularly problematic as the implications of the inappropriate sharing will only be noticed downstream by which time significant damage may have already occurred. 
While we should always strive for ethical care delivery, outcomes will inevitably occur that do not meet that standard of care. When such outcomes happen we need to recognize that healthcare is a learning health system (Friedman et al., 2017) and we need to learn from all telehealth experiences (good and bad) to inform care delivery going forward. 

Ethics of disparity
Why Ethics is very important in the practice of Telemedicine….in short ……………………...because only few countries have up to date modified  specific medical acts in line with teleconsultation. For example medical ordinance in Sri Lanka is very old and no word about digital health and even NMRA act 2015 don’t mention about online prescribing ( even for control drugs).  Also our health ministry guidelines on digital health 2016 don’t mention about teleconsultation regulation.  However, telemedical practice is expanding rapidly. So until regulations/ACTS are updated it is essential that Tele physicians maintain good ethical practice  while practicing telemedicine. We can review documents related to regulation of internet based prescribing as it is the most attractive component in Telemedicine.  

The Federation of State Medical Boards (FSMB) of United States of America has announced that Telemedicine as the most important medical regulatory topics that need to be addressed in 2016 

I could cover the regulatory and ethics scenario of telemedicine in Brazil. 

The Federal Council of Medicine, the regulatory and professional body, tried to issue a new regulation for telemedicine in February 2019 and was met with huge, ferocious resistance from some physicians and had to revoke it, falling back to an ancient 2001 regulation. 

It is now set for a new try next year, but their approach was essentially wrong, both technically and regarding effective communication strategy.  I give regular classes on ethics of telemedicine in graduate schools, such as Magdala’s in Pernambuco, and other places as well. I am particularly interested in writing about the importance of information security and data protection issues as related to the ethics, which involves confidentiality. HIPAA in the USA, GDPR in Europe and LGPDP in Brazil are having a big impact on confidentiality and ethics. I am an expert in certification of EHRs and also ISO 27001/27799. Renato Sabbatini


How different is ethics in telemedicine compared to the regular medical practice?
Should medical councils consider it differently or leave it to their peers to decide whether consultations over the phone are appropriate to their ends? Medical doctors are allowed to open a body to perform a surgical procedure, but may not decide what is appropriate to order after talking over the phone to a patient?
Should patients be exposed to ethical principles too? How local physicians consulting a patient will deal when been confronted with prescriptions from physicians from abroad for the same patient and condition?

19.10.2019 - Dr Vije Rajput - I have added this section below:
Ethical decision-making in health and social care is an integral part of delivering care citizens and understanding the principles of an ethical framework can ensure consistency of its delivery. Implementation of telehealth and telemedicine would need to incorporate these frameworks as in any other health and social care implementation.
The principles of biomedical ethics framework reminds the clinician to consider and balance the principles of justice (the distribution of benefits, risks and costs fairly), beneficence (the provision of benefit or good), non-maleficence (avoidance of harm) and respect for autonomy (the enablement of the patient's own choices).(1) 
These principles are intended to represent a core set of fundamental moral ideals relevant to any society, regardless of culture, forming a system for moral reasoning and ‘guidelines for professional ethics’ in medicine.(2)
There are other factors important in ethical decision-making.
Unlike previously published ethical analysis frameworks, which are based solely on the opinion of individual experts, the new CoRE-Values Compass and Grid incorporates factors and processes identified as important in ethical decision-making, derived from a comprehensive literature review and from published empirical evidence.(2)
 
Figure 1. The “CoRE-Values Grid”
The development of the CoRE-Values framework as an aid to ethical decision-making (2)
 The CoRE-Values Compass and Grid does not aim to provide a prescriptive philosophical position as to which underlying moral systems are appropriate for any given case. It is also important to note that, although the need to balance conflicting values is inherent in the framework, the framework itself does not assist in the complex process of weighing up the relative moral weight of each domain: this would remain very much a product of the personal and professional experience of the clinician involved in the clinical case.(2)
The NHS National Information Board has published “A Framework for Action” on the use of Data and Technology and in building and sustaining public trust there is a proposed roadmap for moving to a whole-system, consent-based approach, which respects citizens’ preferences and objections about how their personal and confidential data is used. (3)
References
1. Beauchamp TL, Childress JF. (2011). Principles of biomedical ethics. 5th.Oxford University Press
2. Helen M. Manson (2012) The development of the CoRE-Values framework as an aid to ethical decision-making, Medical Teacher, 34:4, e258-e268, DOI: 10.3109/0142159X.2012.660217
3. Personalised Health and Care 2020 Using Data and Technology to Transform Outcomes for Patients and Citizens A Framework for Action. (2014). National Information Board.


From Humberto Fernand Mandriola Brieux
The National Directorate of Health Information Systems (DNSIS) under the Ministry of Health and Social Action of Argentina, aims at universal health coverage (CUS). One of the primary tools to be able to approach the quality of health in a wide territory like Argentina is telehealth. The overall impact on access measures, acceptability, cost and supplier satisfaction remain positive. There is limited research on the health outcomes of the morbidity and mortality population. Conclusions: The availability of eConsult services has been extended both geographically and in terms of specialized services offered. By allowing a larger population to be served, access to care is improved; however, the long-term impact must continue to be evaluated with a focus on patient safety, morbidity, mortality and profitability metrics. Telehealth in Argentina allows medical doctors to reach medically underserved areas that encounter patients with difficult problems. Health workers located in remote areas can assist patients and other professionals can get free real-time audio and video consultations with doctors, without anyone having to travel. From the Ministry of Health, telemedicine is promoted as a tool that offers the possibility of better serving people and for us, eConsults based on principles that are based on giving more opportunities to more people.

From SBG
What is Telehealth and what can be the legal and ethical issues
Though many definitions for Telehealth exist as also eruption of various terms like Telemedicine, eHealth and now Digital Health, it can be simply stated as using “Tele” i.e. Information and Communication Technology for “Health” delivery or promotion. Ethical Issues concerning Health delivery should be no different from the same when healthcare delivery is done face to face and are basically evolved from the Hippocratic oath. 
The following are the basic ethical concerns of healthcare delivery when considered from the perspective of the treating physician 
Privacy concerns and patient confidentiality 
Malpractice and Negligence
Informed Consent
Patient Relationships
Physician Assisted Suicide
These are discussed in order
Within telehealth, confidentiality and related privacy issues are more difficult to maintain thanks to viruses, hacking etc. when information is stored on the cloud which is the increasing trend, the incidence of possible breaks rise as mobiles may be stolen or lost along with their privileges of information access. Alongside passwords become easy to break because otherwise they would be hard to remember! There is also the issue of fixing responsibility of any such break of ethics as it may be related to poor security of the system and software – occurring without the knowledge and control of the physician. In India recently, a law called - Digital Information Security in Healthcare Establishments (DISHA) had draconian punishment for the physician including a jail term for any break in confidentiality. Fortunately it has, as yet, not been allowed to be passed with the realization that the problem may be related to a problem from the software side and may occur inadvertently,
Negligence Telehealth may magnify the component of Inappropriate care delivery - as shown in the box alongside In the case of the lady with LSCS (see box alongside) it has been argued that the option of going to place where care could be better existed but was not opted for. Giving telecare for a person who has come to a hospital where a doctor is supposed to be present at all times cannot in any way be justified. A blanket ban like by the IMA (and However looking at the other extreme, is it ethical to not provide tele-support to anyone when he is at a place where there is absolutely no health support, just because the doctor is concerned about the legality of giving such advice.

Informed Consent for the pros and cons of telecare is a much emphasised need as the relative risks of lower quality care has to be balanced against its immediate need as well as the cost of travel for physical support. With 76% of US citizens preferring telecare over physical care, there is clear evidence of the shift towards telecare even. Physicians are less avid supporters of Telecare and the reason generally is stated as “I do not feel comfortable unless I have touched the patient” However, not being able to touch cannot be justifiably called an ethical concern – whether it does create empathy is something that can be argued, however, from the author’s perspective eye contact is far better and easily possible through a video -conference – a known as well as constant component of telecare- 
Specific issues regarding tele would be its use to obscure or even hide information in an attempt towards unethical or even illegal benefits. Some sort of spoofing allows persons who are less qualified or even avatars ( i.e. when the physician is missing) to pose as care delivery person. There are no easy answers to these beyond regulation. Infringement of this type although illegal may be difficult to prove 

Evidence While understanding as well as evidence of whether any legal or ethical limit has been breeched would be easier to discern wherever telehealth is being provisioned as recordings of the entire exchange are stored in memory. The other side to it is that if someone is going to spoof the data -e.g. an unqualified person impersonating as the provider, he /she would be well aware on how to create the necessary false evidence 

Ethics of prolonging life unnecessarily ( to be balanced against PAD)

Home care is making it easier for the aged to live longer, but If quality of life is not improved, we need o understand that mere prolonging of life and associated suffering affects not only the patient himself – who in some cases due to problems like dementia or coma maybe oblivious of the suffering but also all the care givers especially the family. Such care consumes resources – which with the looming danger of climate change needs to considered as a not insignificant issue.

How is ethics different from law?
The law refers to a systematic body of rules that governs the whole society and the actions of its individual members. Ethics is a branch of moral philosophy that guides people about the basic human conduct. Violation of law is not permissible which may result in punishment like imprisonment or fine or both
Use of Telemedicine in day to day care is facing resistance from a large segment of the medical community. Notwithstanding the fact that patients prefer the same as the benefits are far more geared towards their needs while the risks both legal as well as ethical are concerns which the provider has to deal with. However, whenever a problem occurs, whether the patient will overlook the benefits of the process that he elected for and hence there is a definite need for informed consent. 

Laws are made by governments and administered through judicial courts. Ethics are governed by a different set of bodies with a higher component of self-governance with arguably, less harsh punishment. There may be overlap of the two in many areas. 

Physician Patient relationship  and more is discussed in the excerpt from Chapter 13 of the book – as follows (Author - Maurice Mars – reference s at the end pertain to this section)
Telemedicine covers a wide range of activities in countries with different laws, health systems, regulations, needs, expectations, cultures, and approaches to ethics. This chapter explores legal, regulatory and ethical issues of telecare. It is not intended to be a legal text or offer legal and ethical opinion but aims to raise awareness in general. 
There are many legal and ethical issues related to telemedicine. Interpretations and solutions will differ, based on local and national contexts. Because of such diversity there will never be one ‘correct’ approach to all telehealth matters, legal and/or ethical. The reader will need to analyse his/her own environment and the services offered in order to determine how these issues are addressed as well as the possible solutions, taking into account existing laws, regulations and professional society guidelines. In the absence of ethical guidelines for telemedicine within a jurisdiction, it is suggested that the World Medical Association’s 2009 “Statement on Guiding Principles for the Use of Telehealth for the Provision of Health Care” can be followed, - their definition of telehealth includes telemedicine.1 
As with other healthcare activities, health professionals have to comply with existing legislation, associated regulations, and the medical ethical guidelines adopted and followed in their country. Telemedicine may be covered in specific telemedicine laws, or in aspects of other laws such as health, telecommunication, information communication, data security and privacy, amongst others. These may not always be called laws but may be found, for example, in directives within the European Union or guidelines and guidance in China. 
Telemedicine Law
Telemedicine law may be at a national or state/regional/provincial level. Malaysia was the first country to have such a law in 19972, followed by France and Brazil. These three laws differ in their definition of telemedicine. Malaysian Law refers only to teleconsultation, French law to teleconsultation, tele-expertise, tele-monitoring, tele-assistance and tele-surveillance, while in Brazil, teleconsultation allows for physician to physician or healthcare worker to physician consultation and explicitly excludes patient – physician consultation3. A similar situation exists in the United States. As of mid 2017, 44 states had over 200 telehealth related pieces of legislation, many of which addressed remuneration, with no two states having the same4. The definition of telemedicine varies among states, with some excluding email, phone and or fax from the definition and in some instances store and forward telemedicine.
Regulations appear to be interpreted differently or made more onerous for telemedicine. Radiologists and pathologists can routinely report at a distance without the need for a prior doctor patient relationship, or even meeting the patient, but telemedicine regulations deem similar scenarios in other specialties unacceptable5. There are numerous concordance studies in various branches of medicine that report telemedicine diagnosis to be as good as or comparable to face to face diagnosis6–8. Many studies have reported that patients are satisfied with telemedicine consultation and diagnosis.
Data privacy and security rules called HIPAA in the USA were initially created for Health Insurance purposes but do hold relevance for telecare. In India a draconian law called DISHA (Digital Information Security for Healthcare Act)9 is proposed, but fortunately not yet in place. It calls for high fines and even jail for a practitioner for any perceived breach of data privacy. The objection raised is that the healthcare practitioner was assumed guilty even if the issue could be a software glitch or poor storage of the data.
Medical Ethics and Telemedicine
The term “medical ethics” was introduced by Thomas Percival, an English physician, in 180310. Medical ethics are defined as the “moral principles that govern the practice of medicine”11. They have evolved from at least the fourth century BC, with the Hippocratic Oath dealing with two of the four foundations of modern medical ethics, beneficence (do good), non-maleficence (do no harm), to which have been added, respect for autonomy (the right of a competent person to make informed decisions about their own medical care) as well as justice (fairness and equality). Modern medical ethics are largely a product of the mores of the developed world. The individual is recognized as an autonomous entity who must make informed decisions for his or her self.  But local culture and customs differ across the world. In patriarchal societies or those in which decisions about a person’s health and treatment are made by the family or community, autonomy is not a priority. This needs to be considered when developing or assessing telemedicine ethics in different settings. 
Commonly raised legal and ethical are: 
•	Physician patient relationship	•	Continuity of care	•	Data security 
•	Licensure	•	Consent	•	Authentication
•	Jurisdiction	•	Confidentiality	•	Remuneration
•	Quality and standard of care	•	Privacy	•	ePrescription
The doctor patient relationship 
The doctor patient relationship is considered a fundamental component of the delivery of high quality medical care. The relationship is based on mutual respect, trust and knowledge and if absent is considered to impair the physician’s ability to make a full assessment of the patient, and the patient less likely to trust the diagnosis and management12. Regulators see the relationship or lack thereof, as one of the major problems of telemedicine. Regulations in many jurisdictions require a prior relationship before there can be a telemedicine consultation, other than in an emergency. All states in the US now allow a physician to establish a relationship with a new patient via telemedicine and the American Medical Association has defined several ways in which a patient physician can be established for telemedicine, including VC based examinations, a consultation with  another physician who has an ongoing relationship with the patient and meeting evidence based practice guidelines for establishing a patient physician relationship13. How this is to be achieved in store and forward telemedicine is not commonly addressed. 
The WMA 2009 statement notes the challenge that telemedicine makes to the conventional approach to a doctor patient relationship but does not identify this as a requirement, other than the need to comply with relevant legislation and professional guidelines1. 
Licensure
Licensure has different components. The first, is that the health professional has fulfilled the educational requirements to practice. In the US, one has to qualify through the United States Medical Licensure Examination, (USMLE), while in many other countries there is a need for a University qualification in medicine. Thereafter, health professionals must be registered or licensed with the relevant national or local Medical Council or Board in order to legally practice in a given jurisdiction. 
Should health professionals require separate licensure to practice telemedicine? This implies that they will require further education or training. Some argue that this is appropriate, others point out that the telephone has been used in clinical practice over distance for over a hundred years14, without the need for additional licensure. The WMA’s stance is that, “The physician providing telehealth services should be familiar with the technology” and, “The physician should receive education/orientation in telehealth communication skills prior to the telehealth encounter.”1
The second relates to jurisdiction. In the case of cross border consultation, be it between countries or jurisdictions within countries, should health professionals be licensed/registered to practice in the other country or state? There is need to reflect on Malaysian law which imposes severe fines and or jail for health professionals who do not comply. What of international humanitarian services offered by non-governmental organizations? 
Jurisdiction
In part, jurisdiction has been covered under licensure. It also refers to where and under which laws legal action will be taken if necessary. It is usually held that the legal jurisdiction in telemedicine is that in which the patient resides. The WMA’s principle of the Duty of Care notes that, “The legal responsibility of health professionals providing health care through means of telehealth must be clearly defined by the appropriate jurisdiction.”1 It has been generally held that the referring doctor is responsible for the patient, as in the rescinded WMA 2007 Statement of Ethics for Telemedicine15  The WMA’s 2009 position is now more explicit and also addresses continuity of care, “The physician needs to clarify ongoing responsibility for the patient with any other health care providers who are involved in the patient’s care.”1  In the absence of jurisdictional regulations this could mean that the legal jurisdiction could shift to that of the doctor being consulted.
Quality and Standard of Care 
The Institute of Medicine’s six aims for improving quality of health care are the provision of safe, effective, timely, efficient, equitable, and patient centered care16. While telemedicine aims to achieve all of these, is a teleconsultation as good as a face to face consultation and are treatment and management plans proposed as effective? This relates in part to concerns about a prior doctor patient relationship. As stated, there are many concordance and satisfaction studies across a range of specialties using telemedicine that show teleconsultation to be comparable to face to face consultation. The effectiveness or outcomes of telemedicine is not as well researched, but should be monitored in all telemedicine services17. 
Guidelines are a way of setting standards of practice and quality of care. These should follow existing clinical practice guidelines, which may need to be modified to meet telemedicine specific circumstances. Guidelines should be developed by experts within the discipline and should be endorsed by the relevant professional body1. In addition, operational, technical, legal and ethical guidelines should be developed. 
Consent
Should there be specific consent for telemedicine? Consent has been viewed in different ways. The one extreme is that telemedicine is new, different, with potentially more risk to the patient, so the patient must be protected by being informed of all aspects of the telemedicine consultation process18. These include how a telemedicine encounter differs from traditional face to face consultation and care; how data is to be acquired, transmitted and stored; what security is in place to ensure that it is not intercepted; who will see it at the other end; who will have access to it; how confidentiality will be maintained when others are present during a VC session; and how the patient and health professionals involved will be authenticated. Additionally, the patient should be informed of other options available. To ensure that this is done, informed consent should be written with records kept in the patient’s file and a copy provided to the patient.
Others see video-consultation as a little different from face to face consultation and question the need for telemedicine specific consent. The WMA takes a pragmatic approach, advising adherence to relevant legislation regulations, taking informed consent “to the extent possible”, documenting the consent with consent following “similar principles and processes as those used for other health services.”1
For informed consent to be valid the patient must understand what he or she is consenting to. To explain data transmission and its security before, during, and after transmission by videoconference, mobile phone network, the Web, email or instant messaging requires the doctor to have a sound knowledge of what has to be explained and makes the assumption that the patient has fully understood this when they provide the consent. The problem worsens when translators gain consent. Recent studies have shown that less commonly spoken languages have not kept up with technology and do not have words for many aspects of ICT and that patients do not necessarily understand the words translated into their first language or in English19.
In the US 20 states and D.C. have informed consent requirement, with two requiring written acknowledgement from the patient. As the Federation of State Medical Boards and the American Medical Association are promoting the requirement of informed consent for telemedicine5.
Confidentiality and Privacy
The words confidentiality and privacy are often used incorrectly. Confidentiality refers to personal information about a patient that cannot be divulged by a physician without the patient’s consent. Privacy refers to the right to control access to oneself. It includes` physical privacy, and privacy of electronic data. Privacy of electronic data entails ensuring data security, including encryption, during its acquisition, transfer, and storage, and control of who has access to the information. Access to data can be assigned and controlled using different levels of authentication including passwords, onetime pins and biometric identification. Breach of physical privacy and confidentiality is possible when third parties, such as technicians are present during VC consultations.
Authentication
Authentication is less commonly addressed: how can the identity, qualifications, and licensure/registration of the referring practitioners, the physician being consulted and the identity of the patient be confirmed? In some instances, services contract and credential the physicians can partly address this concern. For VC telemedicine, recognition of the person in view serves as a form of confirmation. Store and forward services may use a secure web site with access controls and authentication. Digital signatures and certificates, like the norm for government and legal documents are not adopted for telehealth, but may be used in the future (an image of the signature is very easy to emulate). But what of unsolicited email requests for telemedicine services or the more recent emergence of instant messaging telemedicine and direct to consumer services?
The Ethics of telemedicine 
In the developed world, concepts of medical ethics are well established and are refined as medicine advances and gives rise to new issues. Similarly, approaches to ethics related to telemedicine are evolving. Simplistically, all that is required is for health practitioners to abide by laws and regulations. However, the situation can be complex, and an ethical conundrum. Is it ethical to deny a patient a telemedicine consultation with a specialist when he/she is available, because of the absence of a prior doctor patient relationship, there is uncertainty about data security, or even a lack of understanding of the technology to be used which may invalidate consent? Is it ethical to thereby subject them to diagnosis and management by a less qualified or experienced local general practitioner? 
Must a patient in snow bound remote northern Canada or Russia, isolated areas of Australia or the Sahara desert travel long distances under adverse conditions and at significant cost to themselves or the tax payer, because of ethical concerns? In the developing world the patient may not be able to afford the travel costs or face the risk of losing a scarce job because of absence from work, thereby also being denied quality care
PAD
Is home based care prolonging life unnecessarily? Telecare is allowing easier prolongation of life. Whether a person surrounding by sensors is also living a better may be difficult to state but when compared with sensors within a hospital, definitely make home based care a better alternative. 


References
1. 	Association WM. WMA Statement on guiding principles for the use of telehealth for the provision of health care. Adopt by. 2009;60.
2. 	Laws of Malaysia, Telemedicine Act 1997. Malaysia: Malysia Govt.; 1997.
3. 	Brazil Law N. 12.871. Brazil
4. 	Meltzer R. Legal barriers are limiting telehealth’s reach, experts say | FierceHealthcare. FierceHealthcare. https://www.fiercehealthcare.com/tech/barriers-law-are-limiting-telehealth-s-reach-legal-experts-say. Published 2018. Accessed March 26, 2019.
5. 	Thomas L, Capistrant G. State telemedicine gaps analysis: physician practice standards and licensure. Am Telemed Assoc. 2017;84.
6. 	Bashshur RL, Krupinski EA, Weinstein RS, Dunn MR, Bashshur N. The Empirical Foundations of Telepathology: Evidence of Feasibility and Intermediate Effects. Telemed J E Heal. 2017;23(3):155-191.
7. 	Bashshur RL, Shannon GW, Tejasvi T, Kvedar JC, Gates M. The empirical foundations of teledermatology: A review of the research evidence. Telemed J E Heal. 2015;21(12):953-979.
8. 	Bashshur RL, Krupinski EA, Thrall JH, Bashshur N. The Empirical Foundations of Teleradiology and Related Applications: A Review of  the Evidence. Telemed J E Health. 2016;22(11):868-898. doi:10.1089/tmj.2016.0149
9. 	eGov India. Digital Information Security in Healthcare, Act (DISHA). New Delhi, India; 2018. https://www.nhp.gov.in/NHPfiles/R_4179_1521627488625_0.pdf. Accessed March 31, 2019.
10. 	ethics PTM. No Title. ; Cambridge University Press; 2014.
11. 	Oxford Living Directories. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2018. https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/medical_ethics.
12. 	Kaba R, Sooriakumaran P. The evolution of the doctor-patient relationship. Int J Surg. 2007;5(1):57-65.
13. 	Farouk A. Telemedicine Prompts New Ethical Ground Rules for Physicians. AMA Wire; 2016. https://wire.ama-assn.org/ama-news/telemedicine-prompts-new-ethical-ground-rules-physicians.
14. 	Aronson SH, Mackenzie C, Bell AG. THE LANCET ON THE TELEPHONE 1876-1975. Med Hist. 1977;21:69-87.
15. 	Association WM. WMA Statement on the Ethics of Telemedicine. 58th WMA General Assembly. Denmark: Copenhagen; 2007.
16. 	Baker A. Crossing the quality chasm: a new health system for the 21st century. Br Med J. 2001;323:7322.
17. 	Ekeland AG, Bowes A, Flottorp S. Methodologies for assessing telemedicine: a systematic review of reviews. Int J Med Inf. 2012;81(1):1-11.
18. 	Mars M, Jack C. Why is telemedicine a challenge to the regulators? S Afr J Bioeth Law. 2010;3(2):55-58.
19. 	Jack C, Hlombe Y, Language MM. cultural brokerage and informed consent-will technological terms impede telemedicine use? S Afr J Bioeth Law. 2014;7(1):14-18.



Conceptual plan of telecare delivery without violating ethical concepts will be discussed.

  The law refers to a systematic body of rules that governs the whole society and the actions of its individual members. Ethics is a branch of moral philosophy that guides people about the basic human conduct. Violation of law is not permissible which may result in punishment like imprisonment or fine or both
Use of Telemedicine in day to day care is facing resistance from a large segment of the medical community. Notwithstanding the fact that patients prefer the same as the benefits are far more geared towards their needs while the risks both legal as well as ethical are concerns which the provider has to deal with. However, whenever a problem occurs, whether the patient will overlook the benefits of the process that he elected for and hence there is a definite need for informed consent. 

Laws are made by governments and administered through judicial courts. Ethics are governed by a different set of bodies with a higher component of self-governance with arguably, less harsh punishment. There may be overlap of the two in many areas. 

Physician Patient relationship  and more is discussed in the excerpt from Chapter 13 of the book – as follows (Author - Maurice Mars – reference s at the end pertain to this section)
Telemedicine covers a wide range of activities in countries with different laws, health systems, regulations, needs, expectations, cultures, and approaches to ethics. This chapter explores legal, regulatory and ethical issues of telecare. It is not intended to be a legal text or offer legal and ethical opinion but aims to raise awareness in general. 
There are many legal and ethical issues related to telemedicine. Interpretations and solutions will differ, based on local and national contexts. Because of such diversity there will never be one ‘correct’ approach to all telehealth matters, legal and/or ethical. The reader will need to analyse his/her own environment and the services offered in order to determine how these issues are addressed as well as the possible solutions, taking into account existing laws, regulations and professional society guidelines. In the absence of ethical guidelines for telemedicine within a jurisdiction, it is suggested that the World Medical Association’s 2009 “Statement on Guiding Principles for the Use of Telehealth for the Provision of Health Care” can be followed, - their definition of telehealth includes telemedicine.1 
As with other healthcare activities, health professionals have to comply with existing legislation, associated regulations, and the medical ethical guidelines adopted and followed in their country. Telemedicine may be covered in specific telemedicine laws, or in aspects of other laws such as health, telecommunication, information communication, data security and privacy, amongst others. These may not always be called laws but may be found, for example, in directives within the European Union or guidelines and guidance in China. 
Telemedicine Law
Telemedicine law may be at a national or state/regional/provincial level. Malaysia was the first country to have such a law in 19972, followed by France and Brazil. These three laws differ in their definition of telemedicine. Malaysian Law refers only to teleconsultation, French law to teleconsultation, tele-expertise, tele-monitoring, tele-assistance and tele-surveillance, while in Brazil, teleconsultation allows for physician to physician or healthcare worker to physician consultation and explicitly excludes patient – physician consultation3. A similar situation exists in the United States. As of mid 2017, 44 states had over 200 telehealth related pieces of legislation, many of which addressed remuneration, with no two states having the same4. The definition of telemedicine varies among states, with some excluding email, phone and or fax from the definition and in some instances store and forward telemedicine. Law and regulations related to online or internet based prescribing is very important as main  attractive factor in Telemedicine is the online or internet based prescription. In a survey done in the United States mentioned that 70% of telehealth consumers reported that they prefer to have an online video visit to obtain a prescription rather than travel to meet a doctor . Due to this reason of attraction towards online prescriptions, some intellectuals even describe prescribing over the internet as Telemedicine .
Regulations appear to be interpreted differently or made more onerous for telemedicine. Radiologists and pathologists can routinely report at a distance without the need for a prior doctor patient relationship, or even meeting the patient, but telemedicine regulations deem similar scenarios in other specialties unacceptable5. There are numerous concordance studies in various branches of medicine that report telemedicine diagnosis to be as good as or comparable to face to face diagnosis6–8. Many studies have reported that patients are satisfied with telemedicine consultation and diagnosis. 
Data privacy and security rules called HIPAA in the USA were initially created for Health Insurance purposes but do hold relevance for telecare. In India a draconian law called DISHA (Digital Information Security for Healthcare Act)9 is proposed, but fortunately not yet in place. It calls for high fines and even jail for a practitioner for any perceived breach of data privacy. The objection raised is that the healthcare practitioner was assumed guilty even if the issue could be a software glitch or poor storage of the data.
Medical Ethics and Telemedicine


Commonly raised legal and ethical are: 
•	Physician patient relationship	•	Continuity of care	•	Data security 
•	Licensure	•	Consent	•	Authentication
•	Jurisdiction	•	Confidentiality	•	Remuneration
•	Quality and standard of care	•	Privacy	•	ePrescription
The doctor patient relationship 
The doctor patient relationship is considered a fundamental component of the delivery of high quality medical care. The relationship is based on mutual respect, trust and knowledge and if absent is considered to impair the physician’s ability to make a full assessment of the patient, and the patient less likely to trust the diagnosis and management12. Regulators see the relationship or lack thereof, as one of the major problems of telemedicine. Regulations in many jurisdictions require a prior relationship before there can be a telemedicine consultation, other than in an emergency. All states in the US now allow a physician to establish a relationship with a new patient via telemedicine and the American Medical Association has defined several ways in which a patient physician can be established for telemedicine, including VC based examinations, a consultation with  another physician who has an ongoing relationship with the patient and meeting evidence based practice guidelines for establishing a patient physician relationship13. How this is to be achieved in store and forward telemedicine is not commonly addressed. 
The WMA 2009 statement notes the challenge that telemedicine makes to the conventional approach to a doctor patient relationship but does not identify this as a requirement, other than the need to comply with relevant legislation and professional guidelines1. 
Licensure
Licensure has different components. The first, is that the health professional has fulfilled the educational requirements to practice. In the US, one has to qualify through the United States Medical Licensure Examination, (USMLE), while in many other countries there is a need for a University qualification in medicine. Thereafter, health professionals must be registered or licensed with the relevant national or local Medical Council or Board in order to legally practice in a given jurisdiction. 
Should health professionals require separate licensure to practice telemedicine? This implies that they will require further education or training. Some argue that this is appropriate, others point out that the telephone has been used in clinical practice over distance for over a hundred years14, without the need for additional licensure. The WMA’s stance is that, “The physician providing telehealth services should be familiar with the technology” and, “The physician should receive education/orientation in telehealth communication skills prior to the telehealth encounter.”1
The second relates to jurisdiction. In the case of cross border consultation, be it between countries or jurisdictions within countries, should health professionals be licensed/registered to practice in the other country or state? There is need to reflect on Malaysian law which imposes severe fines and or jail for health professionals who do not comply. What of international humanitarian services offered by non-governmental organizations? 
Jurisdiction
In part, jurisdiction has been covered under licensure. It also refers to where and under which laws legal action will be taken if necessary. It is usually held that the legal jurisdiction in telemedicine is that in which the patient resides. The WMA’s principle of the Duty of Care notes that, “The legal responsibility of health professionals providing health care through means of telehealth must be clearly defined by the appropriate jurisdiction.”1 It has been generally held that the referring doctor is responsible for the patient, as in the rescinded WMA 2007 Statement of Ethics for Telemedicine15  The WMA’s 2009 position is now more explicit and also addresses continuity of care, “The physician needs to clarify ongoing responsibility for the patient with any other health care providers who are involved in the patient’s care.”1  In the absence of jurisdictional regulations this could mean that the legal jurisdiction could shift to that of the doctor being consulted.
Quality and Standard of Care 
The Institute of Medicine’s six aims for improving quality of health care are the provision of safe, effective, timely, efficient, equitable, and patient centered care16. While telemedicine aims to achieve all of these, is a teleconsultation as good as a face to face consultation and are treatment and management plans proposed as effective? This relates in part to concerns about a prior doctor patient relationship. As stated, there are many concordance and satisfaction studies across a range of specialties using telemedicine that show teleconsultation to be comparable to face to face consultation. The effectiveness or outcomes of telemedicine is not as well researched, but should be monitored in all telemedicine services17. 
Guidelines are a way of setting standards of practice and quality of care. These should follow existing clinical practice guidelines, which may need to be modified to meet telemedicine specific circumstances. Guidelines should be developed by experts within the discipline and should be endorsed by the relevant professional body1. In addition, operational, technical, legal and ethical guidelines should be developed. 
Consent
Should there be specific consent for telemedicine? Consent has been viewed in different ways. The one extreme is that telemedicine is new, different, with potentially more risk to the patient, so the patient must be protected by being informed of all aspects of the telemedicine consultation process18. These include how a telemedicine encounter differs from traditional face to face consultation and care; how data is to be acquired, transmitted and stored; what security is in place to ensure that it is not intercepted; who will see it at the other end; who will have access to it; how confidentiality will be maintained when others are present during a VC session; and how the patient and health professionals involved will be authenticated. Additionally, the patient should be informed of other options available. To ensure that this is done, informed consent should be written with records kept in the patient’s file and a copy provided to the patient.
Others see video-consultation as a little different from face to face consultation and question the need for telemedicine specific consent. The WMA takes a pragmatic approach, advising adherence to relevant legislation regulations, taking informed consent “to the extent possible”, documenting the consent with consent following “similar principles and processes as those used for other health services.”1
For informed consent to be valid the patient must understand what he or she is consenting to. To explain data transmission and its security before, during, and after transmission by videoconference, mobile phone network, the Web, email or instant messaging requires the doctor to have a sound knowledge of what has to be explained and makes the assumption that the patient has fully understood this when they provide the consent. The problem worsens when translators gain consent. Recent studies have shown that less commonly spoken languages have not kept up with technology and do not have words for many aspects of ICT and that patients do not necessarily understand the words translated into their first language or in English19. There is a growing need to simplify and develop valid consent language for telemedicine related in terms both in indigenous languages and English. 
In the US 20 states and D.C. have informed consent requirement, with two requiring written acknowledgement from the patient. As the Federation of State Medical Boards and the American Medical Association are promoting the requirement of informed consent for telemedicine5.
Confidentiality and Privacy
The words confidentiality and privacy are often used incorrectly. Confidentiality refers to personal information about a patient that cannot be divulged by a physician without the patient’s consent. Privacy refers to the right to control access to oneself. It includes` physical privacy, and privacy of electronic data. Privacy of electronic data entails ensuring data security, including encryption, during its acquisition, transfer, and storage, and control of who has access to the information. Access to data can be assigned and controlled using different levels of authentication including passwords, onetime pins and biometric identification. Breach of physical privacy and confidentiality is possible when third parties, such as technicians are present during VC consultations.
Authentication
Authentication is less commonly addressed even though  very important as online prescription technology is associated with this: how can the identity, qualifications, and licensure/registration of the referring practitioners, the physician being consulted and the identity of the patient be confirmed? In some instances, services contract and credential the physicians can partly address this concern. For VC telemedicine, recognition of the person in view serves as a form of confirmation. Store and forward services may use a secure web site with access controls and authentication. Digital signatures and certificates, like the norm for government and legal documents are not adopted for telehealth, but may be used in the future (an image of the signature is very easy to emulate). Authentication and encryption will be important when issuing controlled drugs. But what of unsolicited email requests for telemedicine services or the more recent emergence of instant messaging telemedicine and direct to consumer services?
The Ethics of telemedicine 
In the developed world, concepts of medical ethics are well established and are refined as medicine advances and gives rise to new issues. Similarly, approaches to ethics related to telemedicine are evolving. Simplistically, all that is required is for health practitioners to abide by laws and regulations. However, the situation can be complex, and an ethical conundrum. Is it ethical to deny a patient a telemedicine consultation with a specialist when he/she is available, because of the absence of a prior doctor patient relationship, there is uncertainty about data security, or even a lack of understanding of the technology to be used which may invalidate consent? Is it ethical to thereby subject them to diagnosis and management by a less qualified or experienced local general practitioner? 
Must a patient in snow bound remote northern Canada or Russia, isolated areas of Australia or the Sahara desert travel long distances under adverse conditions and at significant cost to themselves or the tax payer, because of ethical concerns? In the developing world the patient may not be able to afford the travel costs or face the risk of losing a scarce job because of absence from work, thereby also being denied quality care
PAD
Is home based care prolonging life unnecessarily? Telecare is allowing easier prolongation of life. Whether a person surrounding by sensors is also living a better may be difficult to state but when compared with sensors within a hospital, definitely make home based care a better alternative.
